# Tankstack Router

[Tanstack Router Youtube Tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ab01W6h4Giw)

**Tanstack Router uses file based routing**

So if you look at a path in your app like `/dashboard/details/status`

This simply will match the file in your routes folder

```
routes
    - dashboard
        - details
            - status.tsx
```

In your tanstack router project there will be a file called `routeTree.gen.ts`. This file is automatically generated by tanstack router and tells the router the exact structure of the routes. This is what makes typesafe routes possible in tanstack router. The routeTree is simply a tree data structure with a root node/route.

The root route is present inside the routes folder and it must follow a certain naming structure `__root.tsx`. This file calls the `createRootRoute` and this is the only place where this function is called. Any component rendered in the root route will be seen on all the routes throughout the app. The root route does not have a path, its like going to `http://localhost:3000` and seeing whatever is in there.

The `<Outlet />` component seen in the root route allows to render any children and is necessary if you want to create any routes in your application.

---

**Basic Routes**

The easiest way to create a new route is to create a new `tsx` file inside the `/routes` folder with the name of the route.

If you want a page called `/about`, then inside the `routes` folder create this file `/routes/about.tsx`. The moment you create the file Tanstack Router pre-fills the file for us.

```tsx
import { createFileRoute } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/about')({
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  return <div>Hello "/about"!</div>
}
```

In this new route file, we see the `createFileRoute` function getting called, all this does is register this route for the Tanstack Router. If you now navigate to the `routeTree.gen.ts` you will immediately see the new route is registered.

---

**Navigation**

How do we navigate between pages?

1: OPTION 1

Use the **Link** Component

```tsx
import { createFileRoute, Link } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/home')({
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  return (
    <div>
      <Link to="/about">About</Link>
      <Link to="/contact">Contact</Link>
      <Link to="/profile">Profile</Link>
    </div>
  )
}
```

In the **to** prop if we have a backslash it gets considered as an absolute path meaning it will take us to `localhost:3000/about` if we don't put the backslash then it gets considered as a relative path and gets routed to `localhost:3000/home/about`.

2: OPTION 2

What if we want to navigate based on some logic, like if the login was successful how will we redirect the user to the `/home` page?

We use the `useNavigate` hook from tanstack router.

```tsx
import { createFileRoute, Link, useNavigate } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/home')({
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  const navigate = useNavigate()

  const handleClick = () => {
    navigate({
      to: '/about',
    })
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <button onClick={handleClick}>About</button>
      <Link to="/contact">Contact</Link>
      <Link to="/profile">Profile</Link>
    </div>
  )
}
```

---

**Nested Routes**

If you want nested routes like `/user/profile/antony`. Then navigate to `routes` folder and create a new file `user/profile/antony.tsx`, tanstack router will pre-fill the file for you and you must see this in your browser instantly.

For nested router just create folders that match the nesting inside the `routes` folder. Now lets have another route called `user/profile/rohan.tsx`, again tanstack router will pre-fill this file for you. Now you have 2 routes inside `/profile`

**What happens if the user navigates to `/user/profile`?**

We will immediately see "Not Found" in the UI. If we need a dedicated page for `/user/profile` we will need to create a `index.tsx` inside the `/user/profile` folder. So when users navigate to `/user/profile` whatever is rendered in `index.tsx` will become visible to them.

```tsx
// /user/profile/index.tsx

import { createFileRoute, Link } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/user/profile/')({
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>You are in the "/user/profile/" route!</h1>

      <Link to="/user/profile/antony">Go to "/user/profile/antony"</Link>
      <Link to="/user/profile/rohan">Go to "/user/profile/rohan"</Link>
    </div>
  )
}
```

---

**Layout Routes**

To create a layout for the page, navigate to the parent of the route and create a `route.tsx` file. Tanstack router will know what exactly you are trying to do.

So in our example, navigate to `routes/user/profile/route.tsx` file.

Import a special component called `Outlet` from tanstack router. In the returned jsx, we need to use this `<Outlet />` component. `Outlet` renders the routes children.

```tsx
import { createFileRoute, Outlet } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/user/profile')({
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Navbar in the profile layout</h1>

      <Outlet />
    </div>
  )
}
```

---

**Dynamic Routing**

To create dynamic routes we follow a special convention by naming the route file with a $ character at the start of the file name. Example: `$postId.tsx`

So lets say we have a route called `routes/posts/$postId.tsx`

Now to navigate to this dynamic route use the `Link` component.

```tsx
<Link to={`/posts/$postId`} params={{portId: String(id)}}>
```

**Path Params**

Tanstack Router provides a hook called `useParams` that can be used to get the parameters in your dynamic route.

```tsx
import { createFileRoute } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/posts/$postId')({
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  const { postId } = Route.useParams()
  return <div>Hello "/posts/{postId}"!</div>
}
```

---

**Data Loaders**

`createFileRoute` accepts another key called `loader`. `loader` is a function that is used to fetch information/data before the route component is even loaded.

Whatever we pass to the loader will run before the component even mounts

```tsx
import { createFileRoute } from '@tanstack/react-router'

export const Route = createFileRoute('/slowPosts')({
  loader: () => fetchSlowPosts(),
  component: RouteComponent,
})

function RouteComponent() {
  const data = Route.useLoaderData()

  return <div>{JSON.stringify(data)}</div>
}

const fetchSlowPosts = async () => {
  return new Promise((resolve) => {
    setTimeout(async () => {
      const res = await fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts')
      const posts = await res.json()
      resolve(posts)
    }, 2000)
  })
}
```

In the example code, fetchSlowPosts is called before RouteComponent is even rendered. We can then use the `useLoaderData` hook in our component logic to get the data.

What happens when the user navigates to this route? What do they see immediately?

The user could get navigated to the `/slowPosts` route using the `Link` component in a different route. The moment the user clicks the router **freezes** until the data is fetch and only then the component is rendered.

So now what do we use? Freeze the UI until the loader resolves or use isPending from tanstack-query and show a loader when the data gets fetched?

The answer is simple - if you have critical information you can fetch quickly(<= 150ms) then use the loader in tanstack router, otherwise use the isPending flag in tanstack query and start fetching the data after the component has mounted.

**What if we want to use the loader on Dynamic routes?**

We can get the params on the loader and then pass it to our function to fetch the details before the route is even loaded.

```tsx
export const Route = createFileRoute('/posts/$postId')({
  loader: ({ params }) => fetchPost(params.postId), // get access to params in loader
  component: RouteComponent,
})
```

---

**Search Params**

What if your route has search params like `/home?search=something`?

We pass the search param schema to `validateSearch` property of the Route.

```tsx
const productSearchSchema = z.object({
  category: z.enum(["all", "running", "casual"]).default("all"),
  brand: z.enum(["all", "Nike", "Adidas"]).default("all")
})

export const Route = createFileRoute('/shop')({
  component: RouteComponent,
  validateSearch: productSearchSchema, // provide the search param schema to the route
})

function RouteComponent() {
  const navigate = Route.useNavigate(); // to set search params import useNavigate from tanstack router.
  const searchParams = Route.useSearch(); // this is how ts knows about our search params

  const { category, brand } = searchParams;

  const updateSearch = (updates) => {
    navigate({ search: (prev) => ({ ...prev, ...updates }) }) // this is how we change the search params
  }

  return <div>Your Shop</div>
```

---

